hey t introduction
by 1985 the cartels began to seek
additional transit points for cocaine
coming to the United States a natural
candidate was the island country just
south of the Bahamas Haiti Haiti is a
particularly appealing option for drug
traffickers because of its location it's
weak and corrupt government and it's
unstable political situation the island
of Hispaniola on which Haiti is located
is on the most direct route barring
transit of Cuba from Colombia to the
United States Haiti has harbors and
inlets which afford excellent protection
to drug smuggling vessels moreover the
Haitian Air Force has no radar
facilities and does not routinely patrol
Haitian airspace drug planes can take
off and land freely at any of the
islands numerous secondary air strips
since the day of Papa Doc Duvalier Hades
government has been notorious for its
corruption the Duvalier family and their
associates profited enormous Lee from
the protection of many illegal
enterprises including narcotics
trafficking however until 1987 most of
the drug smuggling through Haiti was
conducted by individual transportation
organizations which made their own
arrangements with the Haitian government
officials the Colombians move in
following the departure of baby doc
Duvalier and the presidential elections
of 1987 the Colombians took advantage of
the complete breakdown of government
institutions and began to move into the
country in force they focused their
efforts on corrupting key military
officers who were in a position to
assure that there would be no
interference with their operations
according to DEA intelligence the number
of Colombian narcotics traffickers
residing in Haiti has been growing daily
and the narcotics organizations are now
using Haiti as a base of operations
storage site and staging area
in addition these organizations are
buying up legitimate
businesses to serve as front companies
for their smuggling operations once
having gained access to local commerce
they then focus on corrupting public
officials to protect their interests the
subcommittee heard a detailed account of
the process the Colombians used to
establish themselves in Haiti from
Osvaldo Pantani a Cuban American who
became involved in drug smuggling from
Haiti to Miami
quint Ana later testified about his
experience before a federal grand jury
in Miami he explained that the
Colombians established a working
relationship with Colonel jean-claude
Paul by working through a Haitian named
Cardoza the Colombians agreed to pay
Colonel Paul the commander of the
Dessalines barracks for protection and
for the use of runways on his ranch for
cocaine flights command of the
Dessalines barracks allowed Colonel Paul
to play a pivotal role in Haitian
politics because this forces the elite
unit responsible for the protection of
the presidential palace
Colonel Paul's influence was very much
in evidence during the 1987 election
when much of the violence was attributed
to soldiers and security officials known
as tonton Macoutes
under his direction according to Quint
Anna the payoffs to Paul or to be made
by Cardozo on a shipment by shipment
basis in October 1986 Colonel Paul
became dissatisfied with the amount of
money he was receiving and seized a
shipment of drugs in protest
the Colombians investigated the seizure
and found that their middlemen Cardoso
had been pocketing most of what they
thought he had been paying Colonel Paul
the Colombians
sent a team of gangsters to Haiti and
brought Cardoso back to Colombia where
they brutally beat him for his theft the
money was repaid and Paul's demands were
satisfied Quinton also told the
subcommittee about the efforts Colonel
Paul his wife Marie Morell Dillon Oy and
his brother made to establish their own
cocaine distribution system in Miami
Roger biambi a Haitian community leader
in Miami told the subcommittee that
Colonel Paul and other military officers
owned ships which sailed between Miami
and Haiti carrying cocaine
Quentin s testimony coupled with that of
other witnesses led to the indictment
for cocaine trafficking of colonel paul
and his wife by a federal grand jury in
miami however once indicted they could
not be prosecuted because there is not
an extradition treaty between the US and
Haiti further the Haitian Constitution
in effect at the time prohibited the
extradition of haitian nationals Richard
hull will the Deputy Assistant Secretary
of State in charge of Caribbean Affairs
was questioned by the Subcommittee on
the decision to go forward with the
indictment and the issue of coordination
between the department's of State and
justice he said that the extradition
issue and the problem of actually
bringing Colonel Paul to trial in the
United States was not fully resolved in
the pre-indictment meetings between
state and justice confronted with the
situation where an important military
official with the central role in the
Haitian government was protecting the
narcotics trade the United States tried
to pressure the President of Haiti
Lesley Manny got to have Colonel Paul
removed from the military however a coup
drove president manigott from office on
June 20th 1988 and Colonel Paul
continued to play a prominent role in
the Armed Forces political chaos
continued after the first coup which
placed general Honore num fee at the
head of the government on September 18
1988 a second coup removed general nom
fee and brought Colonel Prospero Avril
to power Avril was installed as the new
president and Colonel Paul was finally
forced to resign on November 7 1988
colonel paul was found dead his wife
Marie Morell Dillon OI under indictment
in Miami for drug dealing was detained
by Haitian authorities as the
murder suspect the Miami connection
Roger biambi testified that government
officials in Haiti use a Miami branch of
the tonton Macoutes to terrorize the
local Haitians into cooperating with
smuggling operations BM be said that the
Miami based tonton Macoutes
are controlled by Leonel Wooley a
Haitian national residing in Miami's
Little Haiti according to federal law
enforcement officials in Miami Woolies
gangsters protect crack houses and crack
processing plants they protect the drug
shipments the cash proceeds from drug
sales and they ensure the silence of the
Haitians who have been used to unload
drug shipments from the boats on the
Miami River
DEA zop eration 'he's in Miami and in
Haiti the Miami police and Drug
Enforcement Agency have had great
difficulty in development of
prosecutable cases against the principle
Haitian traffickers in Miami in order to
penetrate the close-knit Haitian society
the authorities rely on wiretaps
informants and undercover operations
however law enforcement agencies employ
a limited number of French Creole
speaking officers and undercover
operations have been limited as a result
DEA regional chief Tom cash testified
that DEA operations in Haiti were also
affected by this problem in Haiti DEA
participates with a Haitian surveillance
unit and watching the port-au-prince
Airport however according to testimony
before the subcommittee the drugs rarely
come through the airport but are instead
moved by private ship and plane through
other transshipment points even if the
surveillance provided useful information
the US attorney Gregory argued that
Haiti lacks an honest police force and
army to make arrests and punish
offenders moreover when Haitian
authorities seize drugs from traffickers
the smugglers are not only set free but
the
narcotics instead of being destroyed are
often resold by the authorities in
characterizing the Haitian governmental
structure Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State hull will observed that quote
there is no central government no
judicial system and the local army
commanders function as feudal lords end
quote the weakness of governmental
institutions in Haiti has made it
extremely difficult for the DEA to carry
out its mission the DEA regional chief
Tom cash testified that his agency had
developed a joint DEA Haiti narcotics
center for information coordination he
then conceded that because there are no
corresponding institutional structures
such as a Navy or Coast Guard to tackle
the narcotics problem the information
center didn't mean much he acknowledged
DEA efforts in Haiti are quote
rudimentary at best end quote
conclusions there is little hope that
serious inroads can be made into the
Colombian narcotics trafficking through
Haiti until legitimate democratization
efforts are undertaken as long as the
Haitian military continues to control
virtually every government institution
including the judiciary and law
enforcement agencies the cartels will
continue to operate unchallenged in that
country however there are steps which
could be taken to make it more difficult
for Haitians to run their cocaine
distribution networks in the United
States one of these might include an
immediate review by the Department of
State of visas which have been granted
to Haitians residing in Miami and were
suspected of being involved in the drug
trade for example two witnesses
identified Leonel Wooley as running the
tonton Macoutes in Miami and controlling
a major cocaine distribution network he
resides in Miami on a US issued visa his
case should be carefully reviewed to
determine whether he has committed acts
incompatible with his immigration status
in addition a major effort should be
undertaken by drug enforcement agencies
to Train specialists in the haitian
dialect there are a few law enforcement
officials with this skill which has been
a major obstacle to developing effective
intelligence operations directed at the
Haitian distribution networks direct
government to government assistance with
the exception of humanitarian assistance
provided through private and voluntary
agencies should continue to be
prohibited to Haiti until legitimate
democratization efforts are underway
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you